# PhD

## Abstract
Background Due to high attrition in randomised controlled trials (RCTs), cognitive effects of infant formula modifications remain uncertain. The aim of this thesis was to test a new method to minimise attrition and, through doing so, to compare differences in academic performance between children previously randomised to either nutritionally modified or standard infant formula.

Methods Nine dormant infant formula RCTs conducted in England (1982-2001) were available for linkage to the National Pupil Database. Linkage was based on legal exemption from the need for participant consent. A trusted third party provided de-identified data for up to four candidate pupil matches per participant and agreement-metrics for all shared linkage variables. I completed the linkage of de-identified data using auxiliary RCT variables and probabilistic methods. Six RCTs (n=1,563) were eligible for analysis, and a further three RCTs were used to assess linkage success and improve multiple imputation. Participant academic performance was measured using exam grades, with the primary outcome being General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) Maths grades at age 16. Modified formula and standard formula groups were compared on an intention-to-treat basis, stratified by trial.

Results Within the six trials eligible for analysis, primary outcome data was available for 86% of all participants. This is substantially higher than the average of 22% above age 2 years in previous consent-based cognitive follow-ups of the trials. I found no benefit for GCSE Maths performance for any type of modified formula. Secondary academic outcomes provided weak evidence of harm for one of the formula modifications.

Conclusions Unconsented linkage of dormant trials to administrative education data is feasible and leads to higher follow-up rates compared to traditional consented follow-up methods. None of the investigated nutritionally modified formula interventions improved academic performance.
 
## Impact statement
Infant formula is consumed globally by over 60% of infants aged less than six months. Unlike other early interventions to support cognitive development, infant formula modifications are highly scalable. They are reviewed and regulated centrally, resulting in the potential to affect a large group of infants worldwide. In recent years, infant formula research has advanced substantially. This includes recommendations to increase nutrient supply for preterm and small-for-gestational-age infants, and changes to the lipid formulation and mineral content of formulas. However, high-quality evidence on the long-term risks and benefits of modifications for improving cognitive outcomes was lacking due to high rates of attrition in existing randomised controlled trials with follow-up to adolescence. However, as modifications were established practice, it was difficult to argue for equipoise to conduct new trials. The work presented in this thesis addresses this gap by linking dormant (i.e., historical) infant formula trials to administrative education data to compare differences in academic performance between children previously randomised to either nutritionally modified or standard infant formulas. I used section 251 (NHS Act 2006) support, instead of consent, to permit the linkage, because the potential for public benefit justified temporarily lifting the common law duty of confidentiality. This method of follow-up substantially reduced attrition compared to consent-based follow-up methods. I report evidence of no benefit and weak evidence of worse academic performance, associated with some formula modifications. These findings demonstrate that monitoring of long-term effects should be done routinely to detect safety issues and to ensure optimal development for all formula-fed infants. The use of unconsented linkage of dormant trials to administrative data makes it eminently feasible to provide new, timely and important answers from dormant RCT data that is already available, minimising costs, waiting times, and attrition bias. 
